Vanadium element number 23, the third,
the so-called transition metal.
So it lies between titanium and chromium in the periodic
table. I don't know a huge amount about the chemistry of vanadium.
I've never actually seen vanadium metal. So let's have a look at it.
It's in a really quite historic box. It's wire. It's not things between,
and you can see there's a coil of fairly Blackish
colored wire. There's several things that interest me. First of all,
that you can make wire as thin as that. And secondly,
that it doesn't look very shiny. Possibly.
It's got an oxide layer on the surface.
I've been given another sample of the native powder,
but for Navien powder can catch fire quite easily.
And so I don't really want to take it out because we might have a fight here on
the table. In my office,
vanadium metal is quite light and it is used in a variety of
alloys. It is also like many of the transition metals.
You can have different so-called oxidation states with different
numbers of electrons around the vanadium atom.
Now there's a really nice demonstration,
which you should watch carefully because it's what our first year students do.
So if you come to this university and several others, if you know this,
you'll get better marks in your practical, Darren,
my colleague really enjoys doing this reaction.
Vanadium five.
It's a yellow solution of ammonia Mehta validate. As you can see,
it's a nice yellow color.
And what are the really nice things about the various oxidation states of
vanadium is that there are different colors.
So what we have here is we have a metal amalgam,
and this is mercury. As you can see, we have mercury with some zinc in it.
The really nice thing about this amalgam is that we can convince some
electrons to jump from this metal amalgam onto some
other species. So remember our vanadium five,
and I'm going to put in here a glug of vanadium five.
That's not a scientific quantity. That's, that's, that's, uh, a glorious,
it's a good book.
The vanadium solution is sitting on top of the Mercury's zinc amalgam.
And hopefully, what am I going to do is by shaking it up,
I'm going to convince some electrons in the metal to jump onto the vanadium
species,
changing the oxidation state of the vignette of the vanadium as I do it,
hopefully we'll see a color change. Can you see the yellow? Yeah. All right.
So let's see.
So now a nice blue color, right?
And the blue color I happened to now is vanadium for right?
So each of the vanadium species has gained one electron changing toxic oxidation
state. It has been reduced. So if I shake it a bit more, I'm going to see,
can we convince more of the metal to give up electrons? Right.
So I think we're looking for
a nice green color
and you can see I've got a kind of a green color there.
Can you see that as green? We've gone from vanadium five to four to three.
Okay. So now I need to shake it up a lot to see.
Can I convince another electron to go and access vanadium too?
So let's see. This is for the mercury is so heavy.
This is slightly hard work. So there we go.
Purple vanadium two.
So we've gone a vanadium 5, 4,
3 to four different oxidation states of an alien resulting in the really nice
purple vanadium two species.
And then what would happen is if we put that on the bench
and left the lid off oxygen can,
obviously the air can get into that container.
And what will happen is we will oxidize this solution again.
So if we waited for long enough, we would see the colors go room.
You can find for native in nature.
There are mushrooms,
the sort of red ones with white spots that fairies and elves sit on
in fairy tales and never know the difference between mushrooms and
toadstools,
the things that grow in forests and in this mushroom,
what may be toadstool,
nobody's quite sure way there are for native compounds.
One idea is that just might be a poison to discourage people from eating it
or not people, but animals, slugs worms.
The other theory is that the vanadium may react
with hydrogen peroxide,
which can sometimes be formed in by chemical processes and which
would otherwise attack more important molecules to the life of the
mushroom or toadstool.
But I think it's really quite interesting that a mushroom or
a toadstool can do good vanadium chemistry
to blow up balloons of hydrogen.
And the thing that's always puzzled me is that when they blow up the
flame has a reddish color and it's, well-known that hydrogen,
when it burns, for example,
in a Bunsen burner or something like that gives an almost colorless.